17.3 Semiconductor Radiation Dosimetry 801
pair in a semiconductor is only a few electronvolts, while energy to create an ion pair
in air is an order of magnitude larger at ∼34 eV
Advantages of semiconductor dosimeters over air-ﬁlled ionization chambers are
as follows: (i) higher sensitivity per unit cavity volume, (ii) higher spatial resolution,
(iii) higher mechanical stability and strength. Since diamond dosimeter has several
advantages over silicon diode dosimeter, one can conclude that in many respectsdiamond dosimeter offers several advantages of ionization chamber; however, it is
not ready yet for absolute dosimetry.
17.4 Film Radiation Dosimetry
Medical ﬁlm radiation dosimetry falls into the group of relative radiation dosimetry
techniques and comprises two major ﬁlm categories: (i) radiographic ﬁlm and (ii)radiochromic ﬁlm.
Both types of dosimetric ﬁlm serve the same purpose and give similar results;
however, the use of radiographic ﬁlm in dosimetry is waning while radiochromic ﬁlm
is gaining in importance. The main reason for this shift is the signiﬁcant difference
in ﬁlm processing required by the two ﬁlm types; processing of radiographic ﬁlmrequires access to sophisticated developers and ﬁxers, while radiochromic ﬁlm is
self-processing and requires no additional ﬁlm processing equipment.
In the past ﬁlm developers were readily available in clinics and hospitals that were
using radiographic ﬁlms for diagnostic procedures and they could also be used for
radiation ﬁlm dosimetry. During the past decade, however, the use of analog radi-
ographic ﬁlm for diagnostic imaging has been discontinued in the developed worldin favor of digital computerized radiographic techniques. This shift caused the dis-
appearance of ﬁlm developers from hospitals and clinics and provided a strong eco-
nomic incentive for the use of radiochromic ﬁlm for medical ﬁlm radiation dosimetry.
17.4.1 Absorbance and Optical Density
Film-based radiation dosimetry depends strongly on transmission of light throughprocessed ﬁlm, be it radiographic or radiochromic. The transmission is affected by
ﬁlm opacity that can be measured in terms of optical density ODwith devices, such as
ﬁlm densitometer, laser densitometer, automatic ﬁlm scanner, and spectrophotome-
ter. Similarly to absorbance A
λof a Fricke solution, discussed in Sect. 16.2.9 and
measured with a spectrophotometer, optical density ODof ﬁlm depends on absorbed
dose and is deﬁned as
OD=logIo
Ior I=Io10−OD=Ioe−(2.302)OD, (17.20)
802 17 Relative Radiation Dosimetry
where
I0is the initial light intensity emitted from a light source, such as a light emitting
diode (LED), laser, or white light ﬂuorescent source.
I is the light intensity transmitted through ﬁlm and measured by a sensor such
as a photodiode, photomultiplier tube (PMT), or linear charge coupled device
(CCD).
For example, if a processed ﬁlm transmits 10% of the incident light beam, then
I/I0=0.1o r I0/I=10, and the optical density of the ﬁlm is OD=log 10 =1.
Similarly, an optical ﬁlm density OD=2 corresponds to ﬁlm transmission fraction
I/I0=exp(−2.302×2)=0.01.
In clinical practice, optical densities range from less than 1 to over 3. The advan-
tage of the logarithmic deﬁnition of optical density given in ( 17.20 ) is that it makes
optical densities additive. Optical density of two layers of ﬁlm or two exposures of
the same ﬁlm are additive and the total optical density is the sum of two densities(OD
tot=OD 1+OD 2). A densitometer that has been calibrated by a standard strip
of ﬁlm containing regions of known optical density can provide a direct reading of
optical density.
A graph of optical density ODagainst absorbed dose of a typical dosimetric ﬁlm
is referred to as the sensitometric curve and is also called characteristic curve of ﬁlmor the H&D sensitometric curve in honor of Ferdinand Hurter and Vero C. Drifﬁeld
who were the ﬁrst to investigate the relationship. A typical H&D characteristic curve
for a dosimetric ﬁlm is shown in Fig. 17.17 . The curve has four regions:
(i) Base + fog at very low doses.
(ii) Toe in transition region between base and the linear region.
(iii) Linear region at intermediate doses.
(iv) Shoulder in the transition from the linear region to saturation.
(v) Saturation at high doses.
Note : The dosimetric quantity of interest is usually the net optical density (net OD)
orOD
netthat is deﬁned as the measured optical density OD meas less the base optical
density OD base,o r
OD net=OD meas−OD base. (17.21)
General characteristics of radiographic and radiochromic ﬁlm dosimetry:
1. While ﬁlm is not useful for absolute dosimetry, ﬁlm dosimetry possesses sev-
eral attributes that make it very useful and practical in special areas of radiation
dosimetry as well as in acceptance testing, commissioning, and quality assurance
of high technology equipment used in radiation medicine.
2. Film has an excellent spatial resolution and is often used to measure 2D dose
distribution maps, especially in regions of high dose gradient and regions of
dynamic dose.
3. Film is especially useful for gaining qualitative data that provide fast general
information on radiation dose distribution.
17.4 Film Radiation Dosimetry 803
Fig. 17.17 A typical H&D characteristic curve for a dosimetric ﬁlm showing ﬁve regions: (i) base
+ fog, (ii) toe, (iii) linear region, (iv) shoulder, and (v) saturation
17.4.2 Radiographic Film Dosimetry
Radiographic ﬁlm has been in use for x-ray detection since Wilhelm K. Röntgen
discovered x-rays in 1895. The discovery of x-rays was translated into hospitals and
clinics around the world for medical purposes within a few weeks of their discovery
and x-ray images produced with steady improvements in ﬁlm technology have formed
the backbone of radiology for more than a century.
Composition of Radiographic Film
Modern radiographic ﬁlm is typically about 0.25 mm thick and comprises several
layers, as shown in Fig. 17.18 (a). The radiographic ﬁlm layers and their functions
are as follows:
(i) Film base – made of polyester resin that provides support for active layers of
ﬁlm.
(ii) Adhesive layer – binds emulsion to ﬁlm base.
(iii) Emulsion – active layer of ﬁlm; comprises gelatin and uniformly distributed
small silver halide crystals.
(iv) Protective coating – protects the active ﬁlm layer.
Note : Layers listed above form single sided ﬁlms; to increase sensitivity ﬁlms are
double sided containing the same layers on each side of the ﬁlm base (in same order
starting from the ﬁlm base).
804 17 Relative Radiation Dosimetry
Fig. 17.18 Transverse section through two typical ﬁlm types used in ﬁlm radiation dosimetry:
aDouble-sided radiographic ﬁlm with silver halide based active layer and bSingle sided EBT2
radiochromic ﬁlm with monomeric di-acetylene based active layer
Emulsion forms the active ﬁlm layer of which silver halide crystals ( ∼95% silver
bromide AgBr and ∼5% silver iodide AgI) form the most important component.
The silver halide crystals (also called grains) are ionic crystals composed of silver
ions Ag+and halogen ions Br−and I−. The microscopic crystals, arranged into a
lattice structure, are not perfect nor are they chemically pure. Rather, they containimperfections called sensitivity specks that are either naturally occurring (edge dis-
locations) or are introduced into the crystals through doping (impurities) to increase
sensitivity. It is estimated that each crystal grain contains about 10
10atoms and is
about 1 to 2 µm in diameter.
Another important imperfection in the AgBr crystal is the so-called Frenkel defect
that is characterized by silver ions Ag+located interstitially in the lattice with their
corresponding negatively charged silver ion vacancies. The interstitial Ag+ion is
extremely mobile through the Ag+Br−ionic lattice and serves as the basis for forming
the latent image during the exposure of ﬁlm to visible light or ionizing radiation.
The photographic effect as well as the utility of radiographic ﬁlm in radiation
dosimetry arises from the lattice defects that occur in imperfect AgBr crystals. These
lattice defects serve as shallow traps for free electrons that are located in the energyband below the conduction band in the energy gap separating the conduction band
from the valence band (see Sect. 17.2.1 ).
Formation of Latent Image in Radiographic Film
During ﬁlm exposure, ionizing radiation releases energetic free electrons (photoelec-
trons, Compton electrons, etc.) in the ﬁlm and these electrons through ionization of
atoms and ions of the ﬁlm components release free electrons into the conduction
band of the AgBr crystals. Some of the free electrons, while migrating through silverhalide crystals get close to a sensitivity speck and may get trapped into a shallow
electron trap.
17.4 Film Radiation Dosimetry 805
An electron trapped in an electron trap (sensitivity speck) attracts a nearby inter-
stitial silver ion Ag+from a Frenkel defect and reduces it to neutral Ag0atom
(Ag++e−→Ag0). If the reduction process is repeated at least another 3 times on
a given crystal, a latent image that can be made visible through ﬁlm processing is
formed. The extent to which a given area of ﬁlm is affected by ionizing radiation
depends on the number of particles (photons or charged particles) incident upon thatarea.
After exposure to ionizing radiation, radiographic ﬁlm contains a latent image
that is not visible before the ﬁlm undergoes appropriate chemical processing thatconsists of two steps: (i) ﬁlm development and (ii) ﬁlm ﬁxation.
Radiographic Film Processing
During development the silver bromide crystals that have been sufﬁciently affected
during exposure to radiation (typically 4 hits or more) are converted into opaque black
silver specks with all Ag
+ions reduced to Ag0atoms and all Br−ions removed. The
crystals that have not been affected during exposure remain in their original state inthe emulsion. A chemical suitable as ﬁlm developer must, on the one hand, be able
to donate rapidly electrons to crystals containing a latent image and, on the other
hand, be much slower in donating electrons to crystals that do not contain a latentimage. The duration of the development process must be carefully timed to prevent
eventual complete reduction of all silver ions to atomic silver irrespective of whether
or not they contain latent image.
During ﬁxation the unaffected AgBr crystals in the emulsion are dissolved leaving
behind the record of radiation exposure in the form of a corresponding pattern of
opaque black silver specks distributed over the gelatin. The metallic silver is unaf-fected by the ﬁxer but causes darkening of the developed ﬁlm and the degree of
darkening depends on radiation exposure of the ﬁlm that can be measured with a
ﬁlm densitometer.
17.4.3 General Characteristics of Radiographic Film
Radiographic ﬁlm has a long and illustrious history dating back to the discovery ofx-rays in 1895. Since then it was used both in the clinic for imaging as well as in
radiation dosimetry as detector of ionizing radiation.
Dosimetry based on radiographic ﬁlm consists of the following four steps:
1. Film manufacture – crystals of silver halide (mainly AgBr) of appropriate size
and containing a desirable concentration of lattice defects (sensitivity specks) are
suspended uniformly in gelatin to produce ﬁlm emulsion. The emulsion is boundonto polyester ﬁm base and coated with a protective layer.
2. Exposure to ionizing radiation (photons, electrons, protons) to create a latent
image in the active ﬁlm layer.
3. Radiographic ﬁlm processing consists of three stages: (a) Development of exposed
ﬁlm to convert the latent image to atomic silver Ag
0; (b) Fixation of developed
ﬁlm to dissolve and remove the AgBr remaining on the developed ﬁlm and to
806 17 Relative Radiation Dosimetry
harden the gelatin; (c) Washing the ﬁxated ﬁlm in pure water and air-drying the
ﬁxated ﬁlm.
4. Measurement of optical ﬁlm density to determine absorbed dose based on mea-
surement of the ﬁlm H&D sensitometric curve.
When used in radiation dosimetry, radiographic ﬁlm is characterized by several
advantages and disadvantages in comparison with other dosimetric techniques. The
signiﬁcant advantages of radiographic ﬁlm are:
•Very high spatial resolution limited by the physical size of the light source of the
densitometer rather than by the ﬁlm itself.
•Permanent storage of processed image and dosimetric information allowing mul-
tiple non-destructive readouts.
•Convenient physical shape of the dosimeter cavity (small thickness and arbitrarily
large area) and ﬂexibility allowing easy use in radiation ﬁeld mapping and general
quality assurance measurements of photon and electron beams.
•Until recently, widespread commercial availability of a variety of radiographic ﬁlm
types and shapes. The advent of digital radiography has signiﬁcantly curtailed the
manufacturing of radiographic ﬁlms and severely limited access to radiographicﬁlm developers, so that this feature can no longer be considered an advantage of
radiographic ﬁlms.
Some of the notable disadvantages of radiographic ﬁlm are:
•Radiographic ﬁlm can only be used as a relative dosimetry technique, since the
response of a radiographic ﬁlm dosimetry system must be calibrated in a known
radiation ﬁeld before use for measurement of absorbed dose.
•Radiographic ﬁlm is not tissue equivalent because it contains silver bromide that
increases its effective atomic number above that of water and tissue.
•Radiographic ﬁlm exhibits strong energy dependence of ﬁlm response for photons
with energy below ∼100 keV as a result of the high atomic number of silver
(Z=47)and predominance of photoelectric effect at low photon energies (see
Sect. 8.2.3, Fig. 8.5). For example, the relative response per unit of x-ray exposure
normalized to cobalt-60 γ-rays for a typical radiographic ﬁlm is about 20 times
higher for 50 keV x-rays and the ratio of mass energy absorption coefﬁcients fortypical radiographic ﬁlm emulsion to water at 50 keV x-rays is ∼100 to 1.
•Radiographic ﬁlm processing involves wet chemical development and ﬁxation
that both require strong quality control and meticulous equipment maintenance toobtain results that are in line with standards of radiation dosimetry.
•Radiographic ﬁlm is sensitive to visible light, so any work involving open ﬁlm
must be carried out in a dark room.
17.4 Film Radiation Dosimetry 807
17.4.4 Radiochromic Film Dosimetry
Radiochromic dosimetry is a chemical dosimetry technique based on radiochromic
reactions deﬁned as reactions that are: (i) triggered by ionizing radiation and (ii) resultin a color change in the radiation sensitive medium. The radiochromic dosimetry has
been developed during 1960s for high dose measurements in the kGy range for
industrial applications of ionizing radiation.
As the sensitivity of radiochromic techniques was improved to the level of med-
ical dosimetry, it became apparent that radiochromic dosimeters could be fashioned
into the format used for radiographic ﬁlm dosimetry. The goal was to developradiochromic ﬁlm systems with characteristics that match, or improve upon, those
attributed to radiographic ﬁlm. However, unlike radiographic ﬁlms that are based on
silver halides, radiochromic ﬁlms would be based on radiochromic reactions produc-
ing a color change in the irradiated detector that is proportional to the dose absorbed in
the detector. Hence, measured color change in radiochromic ﬁlm exposed to ionizingradiation would be used for relative radiation dosimetry.
Radiochromic Film Based on Polymerization of Di-Acetylene
In the past, many organic materials and several chemical processes were used in
radiochromic radiation detectors; however, none of these techniques were sensitiveenough for medical applications. This changed during 1980s with the development
of a new radiochromic detector in the format of radiographic ﬁlm. The active radia-
tion sensitive medium of the new radiochromic ﬁlm is based on di-acetylene (C
4H2),
a highly unsaturated hydrocarbon monomer that contains three single bonds and
two triple bonds (H−C≡C−C≡C−H). The ﬁlm consists of thin microcrys-
talline monomeric di-acetylene emulsion coated on a ﬂexible polyester ﬁlm base. Aschematic diagram of a typical radiochromic ﬁlm is given in Fig. 17.18 b for compari-
son with a typical radiographic ﬁlm shown in Fig. 17.18 a. Pioneers in the development
of medical radiochromic ﬁlm dosimetry are William McLaughlin, David F. Lewis,and Christopher G. Soares.
The radiochromic ﬁlm is translucent before irradiation. Under exposure to ioniz-
ing radiation the di-acetylene monomers undergo progressive chain-growth photo-polymerization. This results in formation of colored polymer chains that grow in
length and the ﬁlm turns to a shade of blue that becomes darker as the absorbed dose
increases.
According to the IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry),
polymerization is the process of converting a monomer or a mixture of monomers
into a polymer and photo-polymerization is chain-growth polymerization initiated
by visible light, ultraviolet light, or ionizing radiation.
It is notable that no physical, chemical or thermal processing is required to develop
or ﬁx the radiochromic ﬁlm image – radiochromic ﬁlm is self-developing; however,
after exposure to ionizing radiation, polymerization slowly continues for about 24
hours post-irradiation and then color stability sets in.
Several companies are involved in production of radiochromic ﬁlms for various
applications. The majority of these ﬁlms require doses that are much higher than
808 17 Relative Radiation Dosimetry
those used in clinical work and the ﬁlms are then used for commercial purpose such
as food irradiation, medical equipment sterilization, and waste management. The
best-known medical radiochromic ﬁlm is the GAFchromic EBT2 ﬁlm produced byInternational Specialty Products, Wayne, NJ, USA.
Absorption Spectrum of Radiochromic Film
The dosimetric signal in medical radiochromic ﬁlm dosimetry is obtained from the
color change or ﬁlm darkening that is proportional to the dose absorbed in the ﬁlm
active layer. The amount of light that is transmitted through (or absorbed in) theﬁlm during the readout procedure depends on the dose of ionizing radiation and the
wavelength λof the light used in the readout device.
Each type of radiochromic ﬁlm has its own absorbance spectrum and an example of
such spectrum is given in Fig. 17.19 for the EBT2 radiochromic ﬁlm in the wavelength
region from 350 nm to 800 nm. Two absorption curves are shown: one for unexposed
ﬁlm and one for ﬁlm exposed to 200 cGy of cobalt-60 gamma rays. The curves showthree absorbance peaks: two dosimetric peaks (Peak 2 at 583 nm and Peak 3 at
635 nm) and one broad non-dosimetric peak (labeled Peak 1) at about 420 nm. The
non-dosimetric Peak 1 is attributed to the addition of yellow dye to the active ﬁlm
layer for inhibition of ﬁlm sensitivity to visible and ultraviolet light.
Measurement of the absorption spectrum of a given radiochromic ﬁlm type is
important, since it allows optimization of the measured ﬁlm sensitivity during the
ﬁlm analysis. Generally, the light source of the ﬁlm readout device is selected such
that it matches as close as possible the absorption maximum of a dosimetry peak ofthe given radiochromic ﬁlm. For example, a helium-neon laser with emission of red
light at 633 nm has been found a good match for the dosimetry peak at 635 nm of the
EBT2 ﬁlm.
Fig. 17.19 Absorbance spectrum (adapted from David F. Lewis, ISP Corporation) for
GAFchromicTMEBT2 ﬁlm in the wavelength range from 350 nm to 800 nm for: (i) unexposed
ﬁlm and (ii) ﬁlm exposed to 200 cGy of cobalt-60 gamma rays. Exposed ﬁlm clearly shows two
radiation induced absorbance peaks (dosimetric peaks), peak 2 at 583 nm and peak 3 at 635 nm. Thenon-dosimetric absorbance peak at ∼420 nm (peak 1) is attributed to the addition of yellow dye into
the active layer of the radiochromic ﬁlm. The yellow dye signiﬁcantly decreases the ﬁlm sensitivityto ambient ﬂuorescent light; however, the absorbance peak is not of much value for dosimetry
17.4 Film Radiation Dosimetry 809
Fig. 17.20 Typical example of an H&D sensitometric curve of EBT2 radiochromic ﬁlm. The plot
“net OD” against dose would serve as a calibration curve in radiochromic ﬁlm dosimetry using the
same radiochromic ﬁlm batch, same measuring equipment, and same radiation source
Calibration of Radiochromic Film
Since medical ﬁlm dosimetry is a relative dosimetry technique, it is imperative that the
radiochromic ﬁlm technique be calibrated before use for measurement of unknown
doses. The calibration procedure consists of the determination of the H&D sensito-
metric relationship for the radiochromic ﬁlm and must encompass all components ofthe measuring system. Moreover, the calibration must be carried out on the speciﬁc
radiation source that will be used for measuring unknown doses. The measured H&D
calibration curve should encompass the dose region of future interest; extrapolationout of the calibration region is not acceptable.
A typical H&D sensitometric calibration curve for EBT2 radiochromic ﬁlm is
s h o w ni nF i g . 17.20 with a plot of net ODagainst absorbed dose. The plot would serve
as the calibration curve for the speciﬁc ﬁlm batch, measuring equipment, and radia-
tion source. The measured net ODof an unknown dose can be used in conjunction with
the calibration curve to determine the actual dose delivered to the radiochromic ﬁlm.
17.4.5 Comparison Between Radiographic and
Radiochromic Radiation Dosimetry
Radiographic ﬁlm has for over a century been used in medicine for clinical imaging
as well as radiation dosimetry. Its use in both areas has been waning during the past
decade as a result of the advent of digital radiography techniques in clinical x-rayimaging and advances made in radiochromic ﬁlm technology in terms of greater ﬁlm
sensitivity and decreased cost for use in ﬁlm dosimetry. Clinical use of radiographic
ﬁlms has essentially disappeared in the developed world in favor of digital imaging
810 17 Relative Radiation Dosimetry
T able 17.4 Comparison of characteristics of radiographic ﬁlm dosimetry and radiochromic ﬁlm
dosimetry
Characteristics Radiographic ﬁlm Radiochromic ﬁlm
Radiation sensitive medium Silver halide AgBr (90%) +AgI (10%) Di-acetylene C 4H2monomer
Radiation induced process Reduction Ag++e−→Ag0Polymerization of di-acetylene
monomer into polymer
Post-irradiation ﬁlm processing Dark room Film processing NO
Darkroom required YES NO
Film spatial resolution High High
Water equivalence NO ∼YES
Signal low-energy dependence Severe Slight
Dose rate dependence NO NO
Visible light sensitivity of
unexposed ﬁlmYES NO
Ultraviolet light sensitivity ofunexposed ﬁlm YES YES
Allows direct water immersionduring irradiation NO YES
techniques. This has caused the disappearance of darkrooms and well-maintained
ﬁlm processors from hospitals and clinics and severely curtailed the availability ofradiographic ﬁlm dosimetry in radiology and radiotherapy departments.
It is simply economically prohibitive to maintain a ﬁlm processor in a standard
medical physics department just for occasional use in ﬁlm dosimetry, especiallyif another technique, such as radiochromic ﬁlm dosimetry that, in addition, fea-
tures a few other advantages, requires no ﬁlm processing. Evidently, the signiﬁcant
physical advantages of radiochromic ﬁlms over radiographic ﬁlms, combined witheconomic considerations, have given medical radiochromic ﬁlm dosimetry a clear
advantage over radiographic ﬁlm dosimetry. Table 17.4 provides a comparison of
various pertinent characteristics of traditional radiographic ﬁlm dosimetry and the
novel polymeric radiochromic ﬁlm dosimetry.
A brief comparison of several important dosimetric parameters for the two known
ﬁlm radiation dosimetry techniques yields the following results:
1.Effective atomic number Z
eff: In contrast to radiographic ﬁlm that relies on dosi-
metric signal produced in silver halides embedded in active ﬁlm layer, all medical
radiochromic ﬁlms have effective atomic number Zeffclose to and slightly lower
than that of water, since their radiation sensitive material is organic and contains
mainly hydrogen and carbon. For example, Zeffof the EBT2 radiochromic ﬁlm
is∼6.8 compared to ∼7.5 for water. This means that the active sensor medium
has a mass collision stopping power similar to that of water and mass energy
absorption coefﬁcient for photons of energy hvexceeding 100 keV also similar
to that of water.
17.4 Film Radiation Dosimetry 811
2.W ater equivalency . Based on Zeffone may conclude that radiochromic ﬁlm is
almost water equivalent and its response is essentially independent of energy for
photons above 100 keV . For photon energies below 100 keV the situation is notas clear: for some radiochromic ﬁlms the response is actually up to 40% below
that at 1 MeV and for other ﬁlms it is slightly above. However, the low energy
response of radiochromic ﬁlms is far less pronounced than that of radiographicﬁlms where the over-response at low energies exceeds the response at 1 MeV by
a factor of one order of magnitude or more.
3.Dose rate dependence . Similarly to radiographic ﬁlm, radiochromic ﬁlms do not
exhibit a dependence on dose rate.
4.Environmental factors , such as ambient temperature and humidity during irradi-
ation and readout, affect the radiochromic ﬁlm response and have to be strictlycontrolled for best results.
5.Sensitivity to visible and ultraviolet photons . Radiochromic ﬁlm is notsensitive to
photons above 300 nm but is affected by ultraviolet light. This means that exposureto incandescent lighting is ﬁne; however, ambient ﬂuorescent light and sunlight
must be avoided so as not to trigger photo-polymerization with the ultraviolet
light that would be of non-dosimetric origin.
6.Post-irradiation processing . In contrast to radiographic ﬁlm, the radiochromic
ﬁlm requires no post-irradiation processing, no chemicals, and no darkroom.Radiochromic ﬁlm is self-developing through the process of radiation-induced
polymerization of di-acetylene monomers that starts within a fraction of a second
after the start of irradiation and stabilizes within about 24 hours post-irradiation.
7.Cutting and immersion in water . Radiochromic ﬁlm can be cut to desired shape
at room temperature in ambient light in preparation for use in anthropomorphic
phantoms. It can also be safely immersed in water.
8.Polarization effects . New radiochromic ﬁlms exhibit ﬁlm orientation dependent
polarization effects. Measured optical density may vary as the polarization plane
of the analyzing light changes with ﬁlm orientation. The effect is most severewhen laser beam is used for readout. Film mounting convention on the readout
device should be consistent with calibration procedure.
17.4.6 Main Characteristics of Radiochromic Film
Radiochromic radiation dosimetry is a relative chemical dosimetry technique that
relies on radiation induced radiochromic reactions for measurement of absorbed
dose. These reactions produce in the radiochromic ﬁlm (radiation dosimeter cavity)
a color change that is proportional to the dose absorbed in the dosimeter and can bemeasured by determining the optical density of the radiochromic ﬁlm with a ﬁlm
densitometer.
Radiochromic ﬁlm dosimetry has been known for several decades but has only
during the past two decades become a serious competitor to radiographic ﬁlm dosime-
try, largely because of signiﬁcant improvements in radiochromic ﬁlm technology in
terms of increased ﬁlm sensitivity, improved understanding of the chemistry behind
812 17 Relative Radiation Dosimetry
the radiochromic process, and decreased ﬁlm production cost. Radiochromic ﬁlm,
similarly to radiographic ﬁlm (see Sect. 17.4.3 ), has several features of importance to
radiation dosimetry, such as high spatial resolution, permanent storage of processedimage allowing multiple non-destructive readouts, and convenient physical shape
and ﬂexibility of the dosimeter cavity. In addition as discussed in Sect. 17.4.5 ,
radiochromic ﬁlm, in comparison with radiographic ﬁlm, offers several importantadvantages, such as better water equivalence, insensitivity to visible light, and self-
development after exposure.
17.5 Relative Radiation Dosimetry: Summary
Radiation dosimetry systems comprising a radiation sensitive dosimeter (cavity) and
a reader are divided into two major categories: absolute and relative. An absolutedosimetry system is deﬁned as a system whose response can be used to infer directly
the dose absorbed in the dosimeter cavity without any need for calibration of the
dosimeter signal in a known radiation ﬁeld. A relative dosimetry system, on the otherhand, is a system that requires calibration of its response in a known radiation ﬁeld.
Three absolute dosimetry systems are known: calorimetric, chemical (Fricke), and
ionometric and they were discussed in detail in Chap. 16. In contrast, a large variety of
relative dosimetry systems are known ranging from very useful and practical, through
mundane, all the way to impractical and of only academic interest. This chapter deals
with relative dosimetry systems that are of practical interest to medical physics andare used in radiation medicine for calibration of high technology equipment used for
diagnostic imaging or treatment of disease with ionizing radiation.
Four categories of relative dosimetry are used in radiation medicine: ionographic,
luminescence, semiconductor, and ﬁlm. Each of these broad categories is split into
several subcategories and each of the subcategories can be classiﬁed as either and
T able 17.5 Four categories of relative radiation dosimetry systems discussed in this chapter
Category of dosimetry system Dosimeter Mode
1. Relative Ionometric Dosimetry Parallel-plate ionization chamber A
Thimble (cylindrical) ionization chamber A
Area survey meter (ionization chamber) A
Re-entrant well ionization chamber A
2. Luminescence Dosimetry Thermoluminescence (TL) P
Optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) P
3. Semiconductor Dosimetry Diode (p-n junction) A
Diamond dosimeter A
4. Film Dosimetry Radiographic ﬁlm P
Radiochromic ﬁlm P
For each category the dosimeters discussed in this chapter as well as their mode of operation (active
A or passive P) are also presented