

===== PAGE 1 =====
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CALIBRATION AND QUALITY 
ASSURANCE OF A THYROID UPTAKE 
MEASUREMENT UNIT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CENTER FOR MEDICAL AND RADIATION PHYSICS 
 


===== PAGE 2 =====
2 
AIM: 
● To Study the Calibration of the Thyroid Uptake Measurement Unit. 
● Perform the Quality Assurance tests of the Thyroid Uptake Measurement Unit. 
● Determine the percentage of Radioiodine uptake using a patient's measured data.  
 
Equipment Required: 
● Thyroid uptake measurement unit (CAPTUS 4000e thyroid uptake probe with a computer system) 
● Check sources: Cs137 & Eu152 
● Source holder 
● Neck Phantom 
Theory: 
 Nuclear medicine is a branch of medical speciality that uses a unique drug known as 
radiopharmaceuticals, which contain radioisotope -labelled pharmaceuticals. These radiopharmaceuticals are 
used to diagnose and treat diseases like cancer and hyperthyroidism and to perform functional studies of 
specific organs like the thyroid, heart, kidney, etc.  
Thyroid uptake measurement is a  nuclear medicine procedure used to evaluate thyroid function by 
assessing the amount of radiotracer absorbed by the thyroid gland. The measurement test can be done by 
quantifying or measuring the amount of radioactive iodine absorbed by the thyroid gland within a specified 
time frame (like immediately after administration, after 2hr, or after 24 hours). The isotopes of Iodine used for 
this purpose are I123 and I131 and are commonly available in capsule or liquid form. The dose administered is 
generally 10μCi to 30μCi for I 123 and I 131. The measurement can be carried out with specially designed 
equipment known as a thyroid uptake measurement unit. 
Instrument and Its Accessories: 
 A thyroid uptake measurement unit  consists of a thyroid uptake measurement probe and a computer 
readout system. The thyroid uptake measurement probe consists of a sodium iodide (NaI:(Tl)) scintillation 
crystal integrated with a multi-channel analyzer with suitable lead shielding and a flat field collimator.  
The thyroid uptake probe, CAPTUS 4000e, is a comprehensive Nuclear Medicine Measurement System with 
specific software modules for thyroid uptake, bioassay, wipe tests and automated quality assurance tests. The 
system includes a fully functional 1024-channel MCA with automatic and manual calibration. The well-type 
detector is an optional device for the assembly, but its presence is very useful in Bioassay and wipe tests. The 
complete setup is shown in Figure 1 below, and detailed technical specifications of the thyroid uptake system 
are given in Table 1 below. 
 
Figure 1: CAPTUS 4000e Unit 


===== PAGE 3 =====
3 
Table - 1 
Specification Detailed 
Make Mirion - Capintec 
Model CAPTUS 4000e 
 
 
 
 
Detector  
 
Probe 
Detector Material NaI(Tl) 
Dimension 2"X2" 
Resolution ≤9.5% or better for Cs137 
 
 
 
Well 
Detector Material NaI(TI) well-type crystal 
Dimension 2"X2" 
WELL Diameter  1.6CM 
WELL Depth 3.8CM 
Resolution ≤10.0% or better for Cs137 
Shielding Material Lead lined with brass to minimise backscattering 
 
 
MCA 
Type CAP MCA  
Channel 1024 
Maximum Count Rate 200000Cps 
ROI's Selection Automatic and Manual 
Operational 
Environment 
Requirement 
Temperature Range 100C to 300C 
Pressure Range 91 to 105KiloPascal 
Humidity Range Maximum relative humidity < 95% 
 
NECK Phantom: 
 The Neck Phantom (Biodex Neck Phantom) is designed to simulate a patient's neck. The phantom is 
made up of Lucite, and it has a two-part insert that allows counting from a bottle, vial, or capsule. A capsule 
holder is supplied to enable the user to count from capsules directly. The standard count rate is obtained by 
placing the pharmaceutical (Radioiodinated pharmaceutical either in capsule or liquid form) in the holder part 
of the phantom, as shown in Figure 2 (c), and measuring the counts at a 25cm distance from this phantom. The 
setup picture is shown below. 
 
(a) Biodex Neck Phantom  
(b)Inner Insert for vial placement  
(c) Setup for standard dose 
measurement 
Figure 2: Design of a Neck Phantom 
 
To measure the thyroid uptake accurately, the probe must be calibrated with a standard source. The 
calibration method used in CAPTUS 4000e is a direct method integrated with the software itself and known 
by the name "AUTO CALIBRATION". Apart from this calibration procedure , routine quality assurance 
checks need to be followed for better equipment performance: the linearity test, constancy test, accuracy check, 
Chi-square test, and MDA test. The details of the tests are briefly described below. 
 


===== PAGE 4 =====
4 
Tests to Be Performed: 
Calibration of Thyroid uptake measurement unit: 
 The calibration simply means the detector's energy calibration . The goal of energy calibration is to 
find a relation between the channel numbers of the MCA  and the corresponding energies of a standard 
radioactive source. So, in our case, the detector, along with the software, is calibrated in such a way that it will 
always show a peak at a predefined location or channel number for a particular standard radioactive source 
with known energy. Hence , each time  we start the  calibration, the software will automatically adjust its 
parameters like Gain and zero offset to bring the known energy peak to its predefined Channel number. This 
adjustment is possible in one attempt or may require two to three iterations. Such a type of calibration process 
is known as auto -calibration. Sometimes, the auto -calibration process is accompanied by  energy resolution 
calculation. For flat-faced detectors like NaI (Tl) thyroid probes, the energy resolution should be <9.5%, and 
For Well detectors, the resolution should be <10.0% measured at the Cs137 662 keV peak. The energy resolution 
generally changes slightly over several years (increases by 1% to 3%). 
Linearity Test: 
 After the energy calibration, linearity tests  are performed to check whether the software gives the 
correct energy value corresponding to the channel number for a known source . It will be easier if  we take a 
source emitting multiple known energies.  The software-calculated energy  and its deviation from the true 
energy value will be displayed on the software screen. 
Constancy Test 
 This test compares the standard source activity with the activity measured. The activity of the standard 
source is entered into the setup during installation. During the measurement, the decay-corrected activity is 
compared with the decay corrected by the software. It increases the accuracy of a measur ement. The counts 
measured are converted to activity using efficiency values using the Isotope Library  of the standard source. 
The deviation between the calculated and measured activity is the percent error and should be within ±10%. 
This percentage deviation should not change for two or three consecutive measurements on the same day and 
for consecutive days. The percentage of deviation between measured and calculated activity shows the 
accuracy of the Detector Probe. The accuracy of the software result can also be verified by manually calculating 
the decay corrected activity from the source data. 
Chi-Square Test: 
The Chi-Square test provides a sensitive check of the system's overall counting performance. This test 
will check the difference between observed and expected counts for a particular number of iterations. The 
software uses the 662 keV peak of the Cs137 source. Chi-square values are given in the following table for 5, 
10, 15, and 20 repetitions. The Chi-Square Test results should fall between the 0.95 and 0.05 probability values 
in the table below almost all the time. 
 
Note: This table is taken from the CAPTUS 4000e Owner's Manual 
The Chi-Square value can be obtained from the equation given below-  
 


===== PAGE 5 =====
5 
Where,  
n is the number of iterations 
Xi = Counts for measurement of ith time 
Xav= Average of the n measurements. 
 
So, for 10 iterations, the chi-square value should be within 3.33 to 16.9, 90% of the time. The software will 
automatically calculate this value and give us the result. 
Minimum detectable Activity (MDA) Test: 
 This test measures counts and calculates activity in the Region of Interest (ROI) for the isotope selected 
in the Setup. As isotopes of interest are already loaded in the software library, the ROI region for the energy 
peaks is already known, or you can add the ROI manually. The measurement is performed without any source 
placed in the detector, which therefore gives a value for the Minimum Detectable Activity (MDA)  
Measurement of Uptake: 
 The thyroid uptake measurement is generally performed in intervals, such as just after administering 
the dose, between 2hr -6hr, and after 24hr. The uptake is usually measured at 25 cm between the face of the 
crystal and the anterior neck of the patient or phantom. Neck counts, lower thigh counts (body background),  
calibrated standard in neck phantom counts (Administered Counts) and room background counts are obtained 
at each counting session. By using these counts, the % of thyroid uptake can be calculated using the following 
formula: 
𝑅𝐴𝐼𝑈 =
𝑃−𝑇
𝐶−𝐵 𝑋100 — (1) 
Where RAIU= Radioactive Iodine Uptake  
P= Patient Neck count rate (direct counts 25cm from the neck of an administered patient) 
T = Patient Background count rate (counts from the thigh of the administered patient)  
C = Dose (standard) count rate (Counts obtained using Neck Phantom and standard s ource to be 
administered) 
B = Room background count rate (Counts without any source) 
Dose (standard) count rate or Administered counts are obtained by counting the tracer administered to the 
patient or a standard (equivalent to the administered dose) in a neck phantom, with correction for decay if 
necessary. 
Procedure: 
Auto Calibration: (Direct Method) 
 
● To perform auto calibration, click on the auto calibration tab on the CAPTUS® 4000e Main screen, 
and after clicking it, the Auto calibration screen will appear as shown in the figure below. 
● On the Select Detector in the right corner of the auto-calibration window, select the desired detector 
(i.e. Probe or Well) to perform calibration. By default, PROBE is always selected. 
● Select the Start Procedure button to start the calibration procedure. 
● After clicking the start button, the software will prompt you to place the Cs 137 source on the selected 
detector (Probe or well). Place the Cs 137 rod source in the selected detector. To ensure reproducible 
source placement for the Uptake Probe, turn the Uptake Probe so that the Collimator opening faces 
the ceiling. Gently place the active end of the rod source onto the middle surface of the crystal. Use a 
rod source holder to ensure the rod stands freely and does not lean to the side. 
● Select the OK button to proceed with the calibration process. As counting progresses, the live spectra 
will appear on the screen as shown. The system will count for as long as necessary until sufficient 
calibrations are acquired. 
 

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 
 
 
Figure 3: CAPTUS 4000e Main Screen 
 
Figure 4: Auto Calibration Screen 
 
Figure 5: Cs-137 Spectrum in Auto Calibration Process 


===== PAGE 7 =====
7 
● During the Auto Calibration, the software will adjust parameters like Gain and zero offset to bring the 
662KeV peak of Cs-137 to Channel number 331. So, within 2 to 3 iterations, it will be achieved, and 
successful calibration will appear in the result box. 
● The result box will also show the FWHM value for the detector. 
● A similar process can also be followed to calibrate the Well detector. 
Linearity Test: 
● After successful auto-calibration, the screen appears as shown in Figure below, prompting to perform 
Linearity Correction using Eu152. 
 
 
● Select the Yes button to proceed with further calibration , place the Eu152 source in the selected 
detector in the same position as Cs137, and select the OK button. 
● After the count collection is over, the system is fully calibrated. Complete results are displayed in the 
lower half of the screen, and all the data is automatically stored in the system. 
Constancy Check: 
● If the calibration is successful, Eu152 Linearity Correction results appear on the screen, and the 
software prompts you to perform the Constancy Test as shown in the figure. 
 
 
● Select the Yes button to proceed. The figure will be displayed 
 
● Place the Cs 137 source rod in the selected detector. The source must be  placed in the same position 
each time the Constancy Test is performed. 
● Select the OK button to proceed with the test. As the counting progresses, the live spectra and 
measurement time are displayed on the screen. 
● After the test is completed, the test results appear in the box below the measurement spectrum , as 
shown in Figure. Note the displayed Deviation value. 


===== PAGE 8 =====
8 
 
Figure 6: Constancy Test Result 
 
Chi-Square Test: 
● Make sure Auto Calibration is done before performing the Chi-square test. 
● Click on the Chi-Square test in the CAPTUS 4000e Main screen, and then the Chi-Square test screen 
will appear. 
● Click on the start button. The software will quickly prompt the Cs-137 source to be placed in the 
selected detector. After putting the source, click ok. 
● The software then starts taking the counts; typically, it will perform a 10-repetition test. The screen 
displays live spectra, measurement time (upper right corner) and the remaining repetitions. 
 
  
 
● After 10 repetitions, the test is completed, and the test results appear in the results box, as shown in 
the figure below. 
● If the Chi-Square value is out of range, perform the test again. If the test passes the second time, the 
system functions properly. 


===== PAGE 9 =====
9 
      
 
Minimum Detectable Activity test (MDA test): 
● Select the MDA Test button on the Quality Assurance Main Screen. MDA Test Screen will appear 
like the figure below 
 
 
● Note that in the Select Detector frame, PROBE is selected by default. To change the detector to Well, 
select the WELL radio button. 
● Select the Setup button, and the Quality Setup Screen will appear. Only the MDA Test frame values 
are used in this test. 
 
 


===== PAGE 10 =====
10 
● To change the Counting Time, click in the text box and input the new value. To select another isotope, 
click in the Selected Isotope drop-down box and click on the desired isotope to select it. This sets a 
new ROI for count measurement 
● To alter values used in the formula for MDA calculation, select the desired radio button in the Formula 
frame. 
● Select the Done button to save the added information, return to the MDA Test Screen, and Select the 
Start Procedure button. The software will quickly prompt you to Remove all sources.  
● Remove any radioactive source from the vicinity and select the OK button to proceed with the test. 
● When the measurement is completed, the screen appears like that shown in the Figure, displaying the 
Minimum Detectable Activity (MDA) measured in the selected isotope's ROI. 
 
 
Figure 7: MDA test screen 
 
Thyroid uptake procedure: 
● Prepare two identical radiopharmaceutical source samples, one for standard reference dose 
measurement and the other for patient dose administration. 
● Before the dose administration , measure the standard dose counts using neck phantom, as shown in 
the figure below. 
 
Figure 8: Standard dose measurement setup using neck phantom and thyroid probe at 25cm  


===== PAGE 11 =====
11 
● Keep the detector at 25cm from the neck phantom with the help of a pointer rod. 
● Before the measurement, background counts should be measured without any source in the room. 
● Before administering the radiopharmaceutical to the patient, background counts should be measured 
from the patient's thigh. 
● After the dose administration, measurement is done by keeping a 25cm distance from the neck. 
● A similar procedure should be followed for successive measurements of the background and the 
patient's neck after 2 hrs and 24 hrs to calculate the percentage of thyroid uptake. 
 
● A patient's software calculated thyroid uptake is shown. You can calculate the % of thyroid uptake for 
the same patient and verify with software using the decay equation for the corresponding time as the 
type of radionuclide administered is provided and by equation 1. 
Calculation: 
Half-life of I-131 = 8.06 days 
Before Administration Room Background count = 417 
CPM 
Net initial count before administration = 
48002 CPM 
 
Nature of readings After 2 hours of administration After 24 hours of administration 
Patient background count  1022 CPM 518 CPM 
Patient Thyroid count 3943 CPM 11949 CPM 
Net patient dose count 2921 CPM 11431 CPM 
Remaining activity (𝐴𝑜𝑒−𝜆𝑡) 47659 CPM 44047 CPM 
Thyroid Uptake 6.1% 25.9% 
 
Precaution 
● Wear gloves while handling radiopharmaceuticals during measurements. 
● Wash your hands with soap and water after the experiment. 
● Never put sharp instruments like a knife or pen into the well or probe. 
 
References: 
● Captus 4000e Manual 
